# Enable webhdfs

To solve the problem which we have encountered with the `hdfs native client`(the hdfs native client can't read the
kerberos ticket in LSA of the Windows server), we have tried many solutions:
- Enable `webhdfs`, the idea is hdfs client connect to webHDFS via `http/https + kerberos + spnego`


## WebHDFS

You can check this [page](../../basic/03.webhdfs_api.md) on how to enable `webhdfs` inside a hdfs cluster

The webHDFS server side works well with Kerberos. But the client on windows such as Rclone does not support
SSPI API to read TGT from the LSA windows.


## Simulate openssh + forward TGT to Linux

When we do `ssh -K host@casd.fr`, after login, a TGT is forwarded to Linux server. The idea is to simulate this process,
we store the forwarded ticket locally on user's home.

A tool has be introduced `https://github.com/GhostPack/Rubeus`, a command can be useful for us

The command `Rubeus.exe tgtdeleg`:

uses the `Kerberos GSS-API` to `retrieve a usable TGT for the current 
user without needing elevation on the host`. AcquireCredentialsHandle() is used to get a handle to the 
current user's Kerberos security credentials, and InitializeSecurityContext() with the ISC_REQ_DELEGATE 
flag and a target SPN of HOST/DC.domain.com to prepare a fake delegate context to send to the DC. 
This results in an AP-REQ in the GSS-API output that contains a KRB_CRED in the authenticator checksum. 
The service ticket session key is extracted from the local Kerberos cache and is used to decrypt the 
KRB_CRED in the authenticator, resulting in a usable TGT .kirbi.

If automatic target/domain extraction is failing, a known SPN of a service configured with unconstrained 
delegation can be specified with /target:SPN.


We can convert the `.kirbi` file to Linux compatible `ccache` 

Use `Impacket` package and  `ticketConverter.py` (the most common tool):

```shell
# .kirbi (Windows) → .ccache (Linux)
python3 ticketConverter.py myticket.kirbi myticket.ccache

# .ccache (Linux) → .kirbi (Windows)
python3 ticketConverter.py myticket.ccache myticket.kirbi
```

https://pypi.org/project/impacket/