# Introduction to AI, NLP, and Large Language Models

Learning Objectives


- Understand the historical evolution of Artificial Intelligence and NLP
- Explain the differences between rule-based and statistical NLP
- Understand why deep learning transformed NLP
- Explain the transformer architecture at a high level
- Define what an LLM is
- Distinguish decoder-only and encoder-decoder architectures
- Compare open-source and proprietary models
- Run a first inference using a pretrained model


## 1 Introduction to Artificial Intelligence

### 1.1 What is Artificial Intelligence?

`Artificial Intelligence (AI)` is the field of computer science focused on building systems capable of performing tasks that normally require human intelligence.

Examples:
- Understanding language
- Recognizing images
- Playing games
- Solving problems
- Generating text
- Making decisions


### 1.2 Main Categories of AI

#### Narrow AI (Weak AI): Designed for a specific task.

Examples:
- Spam filters
- Recommendation systems
- Voice assistants

Most current AI systems belong to this category.

#### General AI (AGI)

A hypothetical AI capable of performing any intellectual task a human can do.

Characteristics:
- General reasoning
- Transfer learning across domains
- Human-level adaptability

AGI does not currently exist.

### 1.3 AI Subfields

| Field	                 | Description                    |
|------------------------|--------------------------------|
| Machine Learning	      | Systems learn from data        |
| Deep Learning          | 	Neural-network-based learning |
| NLP                    | 	Processing human language     |
| Computer Vision        | 	Understanding images/videos   |
| Robotics               | 	Intelligent physical systems  |
| Reinforcement Learning | 	Learning through rewards      |

## 2 Evolution of Natural Language Processing (NLP)

**What is NLP?**

`Natural Language Processing (NLP)` is the branch of AI focused on enabling computers to "understand", generate, and manipulate human language.

Main Categories:
- Rule-Based NLP
- Statistical NLP

### 2.1 Early NLP: Rule-Based Systems

Early NLP systems relied on `manually written rules`.

For Example:
```text
IF sentence contains "hello"
THEN respond "Hi!"

```
Advantages:
- Easy to understand
- Deterministic behavior
- Good for narrow domains

Limitations :
- Hard to scale
- Brittle rules 
- Cannot generalize 
- Difficult to maintain

`ELIZA (1966) was one of the earliest chatbots`, it simulated a psychotherapist using pattern matching.

For example:
```text
User: I feel sad
ELIZA: Why do you feel sad?
```

> ELIZA did not understand language
> It only matched patterns
> 

### 2.2 N-Gram Models(Statistical NLP)

`Rule-based systems` failed to scale to real language complexity.

Statistical Language Models `predict the probability of words`.

`N-Gram Models` predicts the next word using previous words.

```text
P("learning" | "I love machine")= 0.98
P("gun" | "I love machine")= 0.88
```

Problems of N-Gram Models
- Data sparsity (user input only uses a tiny fraction of the entire vocabulary)
- Poor long-range memory
- Huge storage requirements

### 2.3 Word Embedding

Before 2012, `Traditional Word Representation` represented words as one-hot vectors. For example "king=[1,0,...,0]", "queen=[0,1,0,...,0]". 

The problem with this approach:
- large vector : 50000 words means the vector has 50000 dimensions
- no semantic relations between words

In 2013, `Word2Vec` introduced dense vector representations. For example, "king=[0.23, -0.45, 0.67, ..., 0.12]"
Main improvement is `Cosine similarity between vectors reflects semantic closeness`. For example, `vector("king") - vector("man") + vector("woman") ≈ vector("queen")`

> Word embedding is the fondation of modern LLMs.
> 
> 
### 2.4 Deep learning models

Deep learning allowed models to learn word representations automatically.

Key architectures:
- RNN: RNNs process text sequences step by step, but they struggle with long-term dependencies.
- LSTM: LSTMs improved context memory handling.

They had major problems:
- `Sequential processing`: Very slow training (cannot parallelize well)
- `Vanishing/Exploding gradients`: Poor at handling long sequences
- Hard to capture long-range dependencies

### 2.5 Attention Mechanism

The core idea of attention mechanism is `Instead of remembering everything in one vector, the model dynamically focuses on important words.`

For example, in a sentence like "The animal didn't cross the street because it was tired.", the attention mechanism helps
determine "it refers to 'the animal'"

### 2.6 The transformer architecture

The original Transformer is an `Encoder-Decoder model`, the workflow looks like :
```text
Input Text → Encoder Stack → Decoder Stack → Output Text
```
- `Encoder`: Understands the input (reads the entire sequence at once)
- `Decoder`: Generates the output (auto-regressively)

> Modern LLMs (e.g. GPT, LLaMA, etc.) are decoder-only transformers because they are optimized for text generations.
> 

The general architecture:

```text
Tokens → Embedding + Positional Encoding
                ↓
        [N × Encoder Layers]
                ↓
        [N × Decoder Layers]
                ↓
          Linear + Softmax
                ↓
             Output Tokens
```

#### The encoder stack

The encoder stack can have N times of the encoder block, each block can have the below layers:
1. Multi-Head Self-Attention 
2. Add & Norm 
3. Feed-Forward Network 
4. Add & Norm

#### The decoder stack

The decoder stack can have N times of the decoder block, and each block can have the below layers:
1. Masked Multi-Head Self-Attention 
2. Add & Norm 
3. Multi-Head Cross-Attention (to encoder)
4. Add & Norm 
5. Feed-Forward Network 
6. Add & Norm

#### Multi-Head Self-Attention (The Core Innovation)

`Multi-Head Self-Attention` is the most important part of the Transformer.

**Scaled Dot-Product Attention**:

For a sequence of vectors $  X  $, we create three matrices:

Query (Q)
Key (K)
Value (V)

Then compute attention as:
$$\text{Attention}(Q, K, V) = \text{softmax}\left(\frac{QK^T}{\sqrt{d_k}}\right)V$$
Why divide by $  \sqrt{d_k}  $? To prevent the dot products from becoming too large (which would make softmax too peaky).

> `Self-Attention` means the model attends to all positions in the input relative to each other.
> 
> `Multi head`(typically 8 or 16 heads) means we run multiple attention mechanisms in parallel.
> Each head learns to attend to different types of relationships (syntax, semantics, coreference, etc.).
> Outputs are concatenated and projected.
> 
> `Masked` means the model only looks at past tokens 

#### Add & Norm (Residual Connections + Layer Normalization)

After each major sub-layer (attention or feed-forward):

- Residual connection: Add the input back to the output (x + sublayer(x))
- Layer Normalization: Stabilizes training

This helps with gradient flow in very deep networks (Transformers can have 32–128+ layers).


####  Feed-Forward Network (FFN)
A simple two-layer fully connected network applied to each position independently:
$$\text{FFN}(x) = \max(0, xW_1 + b_1)W_2 + b_2$$
Usually with a very large hidden size (e.g., 4× embedding dimension).


#### Encoder vs Decoder Differences

|Component|Encoder|Decoder|
|---------|--------|-------|
|Self-Attention |Full (bidirectional)| Masked (only looks at past tokens)|
|Cross-Attention|Not present|Attends to Encoder output|
|Purpose| Understanding input|Generating output|


> In Decoder-only models (used in GPT-style LLMs), there is only `masked self-attention`(the model can only attend to 
> previous tokens during generation).
> 
> 

## 3. Large Language Model (LLM)

A Large Language Model is a neural network trained on massive text datasets to predict and generate language.



