# Hdfs introduction

Hadoop Distributed File System(i.e. HDFS), is a distributed file system. It has the below components:

- NameNode：stores metadata(e.g. filename, folder archi, file properties, etc.), and the block list, block distribution
  in datanode of each file

- DataNode：stores data blocks of each file, it manages also the checksum of the data blocks

- Secondary NameNode：It backs up the metadata of the NameNode periodically.

It can also share the workload of the NameNode(merge `Fsimage` and `Edits` periodically and push them to the NameNode)

## 1. hdfs client

There are four types hdfs clients:

- default hdfs client via RPC
- WebHDFS client via http
- HttpFs client via http
- web UI

### 1.1 Default hdfs client via RPC

The HDFS client interacts with the `NameNode (metadata master)` primarily via `RPC (Remote Procedure Calls)` for
coordination(e.g. ls) and management(e.g. delete, rename, mkdir, etc.).

The actual data transfer between hdfs client and `DataNodes (storage workers)` happens directly
over a `separate Data Transfer Protocol (not RPC)`.

> This design keeps the NameNode lightweight—it never moves data itself.
>

#### hdfs client workflow during data uploading

When a client uploads a file (e.g. `hdfs dfs -put`), the flow is:

1. File Creation request:
   - The client triggers an `RPC call to the NameNode` using the `ClientProtocol`.
   - The NameNode checks: file doesn't exist, client has write permissions, etc.
   - If check successful, NameNode creates a metadata entry for the file and returns an `FSDataOutputStream` to the HDFS
   client. The underlying DFSOutputStream handles the rest.
   - If check failed, stop all and send error message to client
2. Block Allocation (RPC to NameNode):
   - The client receives the `FSDataOutputStream` and writes data in chunks. When enough data accumulates for one
   block (default 128 MB or 256 MB), `FSDataOutputStream` creates a new thread `DataStreamer`
   - The `DataStreamer` thread makes an RPC call(i.e. `addBlock`) to the NameNode, this call will request locations
   for the new block. NameNode returns a `list of DataNodes` for replicas (based on replication factor, default 3, rack
   awareness, load, etc.).
   The list of DataNodes form a pipeline (e.g., DN1 -> DN2 -> DN3).

3. Data Transfer: The HDFS client streams data block directly to the first DataNode in the pipeline. The first DataNode
   stores its replica locally then forwards the packet to the next DataNode in the pipeline.

4. Acknowledgment and Completion:
    - Acknowledgments of one block flow back in reverse: last DN -> previous -> ... -> first DN -> client (via the data
      transfer connection).
    - Once all packets for a block are acknowledged by the entire pipeline, the HDFS client notifies the NameNode via
      RPC that the block is complete.
    - After client notification NameNode updates metadata with block locations.

The step 2,3,4 repeats for every block in the file. When the client calls `close()` on the stream, a final RPC to
NameNode finalizes the file (commits metadata, releases lease).

> The data block forwarding between the DataNodes in the pipeline reduces latency and network load (data flows in a
> chain rather than client sending to all replicas separately)
>

#### HDFS client workflow during data downloading

When a client downloads a file (e.g. `hdfs dfs -get`), the flow is:

1. Client send `open` request:
   - The client triggers an `RPC call to the NameNode` via `ClientProtocol(e.g. getBlockLocations)`.
   - NameNode checks permissions if success it returns block metadata(e.g. list of blocks + DataNode locations for each
   block's replicas.) to hdfs client
   - if checks failed, stop all send client error message
2. Data Transfer :
    - The client creates `DFSInputStream` connects directly to the closest DataNode for the first block (Not RPC).
    - Data streams from DataNode to client over the Data Transfer Protocol.
    - When a block ends, the client closes that connection and moves to the next block (possibly on a different
      DataNode).
    - Reads can be parallelized if the client/application supports it.
    - If a DataNode fails during read, the client transparently fails over to another replica (via cached locations or a
      quick follow-up RPC if needed).
3. Acknowledgment and Completion: The hdfs client close all connection after the all data block have been transferred.

> HDFS data locality: data block locations are sorted by proximity to the client (same rack/node preferred for
> locality).

### 1.2 WebHDFS vs HttpFs

The core difference is the architecture

For `WebHDFS`, the client first talks to NameNode to get the block location, then tals to DataNode directly to get the
data blocs. As a result, the client must have the ability to talk to all nodes in the cluster

Pros:

- Faster (Direct DataNode transfer)
- No proxy overhead

Cons:

- Complexe network setups: Must handle redirects + client must reach DataNodes
- Client must support SPNEGO correctly

```text
Client
  ↓
NameNode (metadata)
  ↓ (redirect client to data nodes)
DataNode (data transfer)
```

For HttpFS, the client talks to only one `gateway` server, the `gateway` server gathers data blocs and send back to the
client.
the client never access/see the datanode. In this mode, the client only needs to talk one server, so if you have

Pros:

- Single entrypoint: no redict

Cons:

- Slower: Data goes through proxy
- Adds latency + CPU load

```text
Client
  ↓
HttpFS server
  ↓
NameNode + DataNodes (internal)
```

## 2. Pros and cons of hdfs

### Pros

- Fault tolerance: Multiple copies(block duplication) of the data are automatically saved. For 2N+1 nodes, the cluster
  can continue to work if N nodes failed.

- Data volume: Capable of handling data volumes in the range of `gigabytes, terabytes, or even petabytes`. Capable of
  handling millions of files.

- Low-cost: the hadoop cluster does not require high performance servers.

### Cons

- Design for HTC (High Throughput Computing), not for HPC(High-Performance Computing): It is not suitable for
  low-latency data access; for example, it is not capable of handling millisecond-level storage data.

- Small file storage: Storing a large number of small files would consume a
  `significant amount of the NameNode’s memory to store file directory and block information`.
  The time taken to locate small files exceeds the time taken to read them.

- Does not support `concurrent writes or random file modifications`: Only one write operation is permitted per file at a
  time;
  multiple threads are not allowed to write simultaneously. Only data appends are supported; random file modifications
  are not supported.

## NameNode and Secondary NameNode corporation

## Fsimage 和 Edits 解析

`Secondary NameNode is not a fail-over NameNode`. When `NameNode` is down, `Secondary NameNode` can't replace
`NameNode` directly and resume service. Secondary NameNode can help NameNode to rebuild and resume service.

When NameNode is down and lose all history，in the directory `${HAOOP_HOME}/data/dfs/name/current`, you will find the
below files:

```shell
fsimage_oooooooooooooooooo0
fsimage_ooo00000ooooo000000. md5
seen_txid
VERSION
```

1. `Fsimage` file: The `last persistent checkpoint of the HDFS file system metadata` before the NameNode down,
   containing serialised information
   about all directories and file inodes in the HDFS file system.

2. `Edits` file: the path where all update operations on the HDFS file system are stored; all write operations performed
   by the file system client are first recorded in the Edits file.

3. `seen_txid` file: contains a number, which is the last number in the `edits_` field.

> Each time the NameNode starts up, it reads the `Fsimage` file into memory and loads the update operations
> contained in the `Edits` file, ensuring that the metadata in memory is up to date and synchronised.
> This can be viewed as the NameNode merging the Fsimage and Edits files upon startup.

Commands to view the fsimage and edits

```shell
# general form
## view the content of the Fsimage file
hdfs oiv -p <output_format> -i <fsimage_src> -o <output_path>

# for example
cd /opt/bigdata/hadoop-3.2.3/data/dfs/name/current/
hdfs oiv -p XML -i fsimage_0000000000000000256 -o /opt/fsimage.xml

## view the content of the edits file
hdfs oev -p <output_format> -i <edits_src> -o <output_path>

# for example
cd /opt/bigdata/hadoop-3.2.3/data/dfs/name/current/
hdfs oev -p XML -i edits_0000000000000000001-0000000000000000154 -o /opt/edits.xml

```

## 3. Hadoop Port convention

For modern hadoop cluster, the port number has been shifted

| server         | port  |
|----------------|-------|
| NameNode RPC   | 	8020 |
| NameNode HTTP  | 	9870 |
| NameNode HTTPS | 	9871 |
| DataNode HTTP  | 	9864 |
| DataNode HTTPS | 	9865 |
| DataNode RPC   | 	9866 |
| Secondary NN   | 	9868 |

> The DataNode RPC port are never used by HDFS client, so end user does not need to know it.

In `hdfs-site.xml`, if you want to force HTTPs, you can add the below config

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<?xml-stylesheet type="text/xsl" href="configuration.xsl"?>

<configuration>
    <property>
        <name>dfs.http.policy</name>
        <value>HTTPS_ONLY</value>
    </property>

    <!-- specify service ports for NameNode  -->
    <property>
        <name>dfs.namenode.http-address</name>
        <value>0.0.0.0:9870</value>
    </property>

    <property>
        <name>dfs.https.address</name>
        <value>0.0.0.0:9871</value>
    </property>
    <!-- specify service ports for DataNode  -->
    <property>
        <name>dfs.datanode.http.address</name>
        <value>0.0.0.0:9864</value>
    </property>
    <property>
        <name>dfs.datanode.https.address</name>
        <value>0.0.0.0:9865</value>
    </property>
</configuration>
```

> When you put dfs.http.policy=HTTPS_ONLY, the http port specification is useless. 